diagnostics_channel: add tracing channel (#44943)
nodejs/node: doc/api/diagnostics_channel.md

diagnostics_channel.unsubscribe('my-channel', onMessage);
```

#### `diagnostics_channel.tracingChannel(nameOrChannels)`

<!-- YAML
added:
 - REPLACEME
-->

* `nameOrChannels` {string|TracingChannel} Channel name or
  object containing all the [TracingChannel Channels][]
* Returns: {TracingChannel} Collection of channels to trace with

> Creates a [`TracingChannel`][] wrapper for given [TracingChannel Channels][].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Creates a [`TracingChannel`][] wrapper for the given [TracingChannel Channels][].
```

diagnostics_channel.unsubscribe('my-channel', onMessage);
```

#### `diagnostics_channel.tracingChannel(nameOrChannels)`

<!-- YAML
added:
 - REPLACEME
-->

> Stability: 1 - Experimental

* `nameOrChannels` {string|TracingChannel} Channel name or

>   object containing all the [TracingChannel Channels][]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  array containing all the [TracingChannel Channels][]
```

Shouldn't the type be: `{string|TracingChannel|TracingChannel[]}`?

Author: No, it doesn't take an array, it takes an object mapping names to the corresponding channels of a TracingChannel. So you could use custom channels for each of the five channels (`start`, `end`, `asyncStart`, `asyncEnd`, `error`) rather than the defaults. The `TracingChannel` type here refers to it not as a class but as an object shape to copy into a _new_ TracingChannel.

* Returns: {TracingChannel} Collection of channels to trace with

Creates a [`TracingChannel`][] wrapper for the given
[TracingChannel Channels][]. If a name is given, the corresponding tracing
channels will be created in the form of `tracing:${name}:${eventType}` where
`eventType` corresponds to the types of [TracingChannel Channels][].

```mjs
import diagnostics_channel from 'node:diagnostics_channel';

> const channelsByName = diagnostics_channel.tracingChannel('my-channel');

Reviewer 2: I feel `channelsByName` is quite confusing. Wouldn't it be just `channels`?

Author: I needed to give it a unique name because the linter complains if both examples share the same variable name.

<!-- YAML
added:
 - REPLACEME
-->

* `store` {AsyncLocalStorage} The store to which to bind the event data
* `transform` {Function} Transform the event data before setting the context

When [`channel.runStores(data, ...)`][] is called, the given event data will
be applied to any store bound to the channel. If the store has already been
bound the previous `transform` function will be replaced with the new one.
The `transform` function may be omitted to have the event data be used as the
context directly.

```mjs
import diagnostics_channel from 'node:diagnostics_channel';
import { AsyncLocalStorage } from 'node:async_hooks';

const store = new AsyncLocalStorage();

const channel = diagnostics_channel.channel('my-channel');

channel.bindStore(store, (message) => {
  return { message };
});
```

```cjs
const diagnostics_channel = require('node:diagnostics_channel');
const { AsyncLocalStorage } = require('node:async_hooks');

const store = new AsyncLocalStorage();

const channel = diagnostics_channel.channel('my-channel');

channel.bindStore(store, (message) => {
  return { message };
});
```

#### `channel.unbindStore(store)`

<!-- YAML
added:
 - REPLACEME
-->

> * `store` {AsyncLocalStorage} The store to unbind from the channel

Reviewer: Can you make this consistent throughout the docs.

```suggestion
* `store` {AsyncLocalStorage} The store to unbind from the channel.
```

channels.subscribe({
  start(message) {
    // Handle start message
  },
  end(message) {
    // Handle end message
  },
  asyncStart(message) {
    // Handle asyncEnd message
  },
  asyncEnd(message) {
    // Handle asyncEnd message
  },
  error(message) {
    // Handle error message
  },
});
```

```cjs
const diagnostics_channel = require('node:diagnostics_channel');

const channels = diagnostics_channel.tracingChannel('my-channel');

channels.subscribe({
  start(message) {
    // Handle start message
  },
  end(message) {
    // Handle end message
  },
  asyncStart(message) {
    // Handle asyncEnd message
  },
  asyncEnd(message) {
    // Handle asyncEnd message
  },
  error(message) {
    // Handle error message
  },
});
```

#### `tracingChannel.unsubscribe(subscribers)`

<!-- YAML
added:
 - REPLACEME
-->

* `subscribers` {Object} Set of [TracingChannel Channels][] subscribers
  * `start` {Function} The [`start` event][] subscriber
  * `end` {Function} The [`end` event][] subscriber
  * `asyncStart` {Function} The [`asyncStart` event][] subscriber
  * `asyncEnd` {Function} The [`asyncEnd` event][] subscriber
  * `error` {Function} The [`error` event][] subscriber

> * Returns: {boolean} If all handlers were successfully unsubscribed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Returns: {boolean} `true` if all handlers were successfully unsubscribed, and `false` otherwise.
```

channels.unsubscribe({
  start(message) {
    // Handle start message
  },
  end(message) {
    // Handle end message
  },
  asyncStart(message) {
    // Handle asyncEnd message
  },
  asyncEnd(message) {
    // Handle asyncEnd message
  },
  error(message) {
    // Handle error message
  },
});
```

```cjs
const diagnostics_channel = require('node:diagnostics_channel');

const channels = diagnostics_channel.tracingChannel('my-channel');

channels.unsubscribe({
  start(message) {
    // Handle start message
  },
  end(message) {
    // Handle end message
  },
  asyncStart(message) {
    // Handle asyncEnd message
  },
  asyncEnd(message) {
    // Handle asyncEnd message
  },
  error(message) {
    // Handle error message
  },
});
```

#### `tracingChannel.traceSync(fn[, ctx[, thisArg, [, ...args]]])`

<!-- YAML
added:
 - REPLACEME
-->

* `fn` {Function} Function to wrap a trace around
* `ctx` {Object} Shared context object to correlate trace events through
* `thisArg` {any} The receiver to be used for the function call
* `...args` {any} Optional arguments to pass to the function
* Returns: {any} The return value of the given function

> Trace a sync function call. This will always produce `start` and `end` events

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Trace a synchronous function call. This will always produce `start` and `end` events
```

as it may be possible for a traceable action to produce multiple errors. For
example, an async task which fails may be started internally before the sync
part of the task then throws an error.

#### `asyncStart(event)`

* Name: `tracing:${name}:asyncStart`

The `asyncStart` event represents the callback or continuation of a traceable
function being reached. At this point things like callback arguments may be
available, or anything else expressing the "result" of the action.

For callbacks-based functions, the first argument of the callback will be
assigned to the `error` field, if not undefined, and the second argument will
be assigned to the `result` field.

For promises, the argument to the `resolve` path will be assigned to `result`
or the argument to the `reject` path will be assign to `error`.

It is recommended to listen specifically to the `error` event to track errors
as it may be possible for a traceable action to produce multiple errors. For
example, an async task which fails may be started internally before the sync
part of the task then throws an error.

#### `asyncEnd(event)`

* Name: `tracing:${name}:asyncEnd`

> The `asyncEnd` event represents the callback of an async traceable function

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `asyncEnd` event represents the callback of an asynchronous traceable function
```

channel.unsubscribe(onMessage);
```

#### `channel.bindStore(store[, transform])`

<!-- YAML
added:
 - REPLACEME
-->

> Stability: 1 - Experimental

* `store` {AsyncLocalStorage} The store to which to bind the event data
* `transform` {Function} Transform the event data before setting the context

> When [`channel.runStores(data, ...)`][] is called, the given event data will

Reviewer 2: I might be missing context, but I don't understand why this function is useful. Could you elaborate?

Author: You mean `channel.runStores(...)`? It exists to allow for mapping diagnostics_channel event data to an AsyncLocalStorage instance. The main use case is for APMs to use event data to create a span around some function call and any descending async behaviour.

Reviewer 2: Sorry, I meant `channel.bindStore`

Author: The `bindStore` method is how an `AsyncLocalStorage` instance is connected to a given event. It's the `AsyncLocalStorage` equivalent of the `subscribe` method. When a store is bound to a channel it will set its context to the event data whenever the event occurs, for the scope of the function given to the `runStores(...)` method. If a `transform` function was given with in the `bindStore` call it will be used to transform the event data before it becomes the context value for that particular store.

For example, an APM might want to do something like:

```
const mysqlTrace = dc.tracingChannel('mysql.query')

// In APM code somewhere...
mysqlTrace.bindStore(apmStore, (queryData) => {
  const parent = apmStore.getStore()
  return new Span('mysql.query', {
    query: queryData.query
  }, parent)
})

// In mysql library...
class Connection {
  query(queryString, values, callback) {
    mysqlTrace.traceCallback(function wrappedQuery (queryString, values, callback) {
      // original query code goes here...
    }, 2, {
      query: queryString
    }, this, queryString, values, callback)
  }
}
```

When that is done, the `Span` object returned by the `transform` function will become the current context within the scope of that wrappedQuery function and any nested async activity. Until it gets set to something else. APMs generally will chain the spans together by linked to a "parent" span which is what the `const parent = apmStore.getStore()` part represents.

Reviewer 2: Thanks for the explanation!

be applied to any store bound to the channel. If the store has already been
bound the previous `transform` function will be replaced with the new one.
The `transform` function may be omitted to have the event data be used as the
context directly.

```mjs
import diagnostics_channel from 'node:diagnostics_channel';
import { AsyncLocalStorage } from 'node:async_hooks';

const store = new AsyncLocalStorage();

const channel = diagnostics_channel.channel('my-channel');

> channel.bindStore(store, (message) => {

Reviewer 3: I'd find the name "data" better fits here as it is present in the signature `channel.runStores(data, ...)`:

```suggestion
channel.bindStore(store, (data) => {
  return { data };
});
```

* `store` {AsyncLocalStorage} The store to unbind from the channel.
* Returns: {boolean} `true` if the store was found, `false` otherwise.

Remove a message handler previously registered to this channel with
[`channel.bindStore(store)`][].

```mjs
import diagnostics_channel from 'node:diagnostics_channel';
import { AsyncLocalStorage } from 'node:async_hooks';

const store = new AsyncLocalStorage();

const channel = diagnostics_channel.channel('my-channel');

channel.bindStore(store);
channel.unbindStore(store);
```

```cjs
const diagnostics_channel = require('node:diagnostics_channel');
const { AsyncLocalStorage } = require('node:async_hooks');

const store = new AsyncLocalStorage();

const channel = diagnostics_channel.channel('my-channel');

channel.bindStore(store);
channel.unbindStore(store);
```

#### `channel.runStores(data, fn[, thisArg[, ...args]])`

<!-- YAML
added:
 - REPLACEME
-->

> Stability: 1 - Experimental

* `data` {any} Message to send to subscribers and bind to stores
* `fn` {Function} Handler to run within the entered storage context
* `thisArg` {any} The receiver to be used for the function call.
* `...args` {any} Optional arguments to pass to the function.

> Publishes data to the channel and applies it to any AsyncLocalStorage instances

Reviewer 4: I think we should document the sequence that first publish happens and then the store is entered.

Author: Could do that. Can you think of any examples when that ordering would matter? Do we need to say anything beyond just swapping that `and` for a `then`?

Reviewer 4: It should be clear what one gets if  `als.getStore()` is called inside the `onMessage` function. Same is valid for the `transform` function where sample relies on the fact that it happens before `als.run()` is called to get the parent.

I think it's important to tell users that `publish` and `transform` happen before.

Author: Fair. I'll make some improvements to that soon. :)

transform the message data before it becomes to context value for the store.

```mjs
import diagnostics_channel from 'node:diagnostics_channel';
import { AsyncLocalStorage } from 'node:async_hooks';

const store = new AsyncLocalStorage();

const channel = diagnostics_channel.channel('my-channel');

channel.bindStore(store, (message) => {
  const parent = store.getStore();
  return new Span(message, parent);
});
channel.runStores({ some: 'message' }, () => {
  store.getStore(); // Span({ some: 'message' })
});
```

```cjs
const diagnostics_channel = require('node:diagnostics_channel');
const { AsyncLocalStorage } = require('node:async_hooks');

const store = new AsyncLocalStorage();

const channel = diagnostics_channel.channel('my-channel');

channel.bindStore(store, (message) => {
  const parent = store.getStore();
  return new Span(message, parent);
});
channel.runStores({ some: 'message' }, () => {
  store.getStore(); // Span({ some: 'message' })
});
```

### Class: `TracingChannel`

<!-- YAML
added:
 - REPLACEME
-->

> Stability: 1 - Experimental

The class `TracingChannel` is a collection of [TracingChannel Channels][] which

> together express a trace. It is used to formalize and simplify the process of

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
together express a span. It is used to formalize and simplify the process of
```

Or maybe `operation`. The term trace is usually a tree of linked spans/operations and a single tracing channel forms one entry of a trace not the whole trace.

Author: I don't think "span" or "operation" are great terms here either as there's zero agreement on terminology for what those units are called between APMs. It also means additional terminology that likely needs more explaining. This feature is not intended exclusively for APM and what can be considered a "trace" can be a single unit just as much as a collection of units. I think given the naming of TracingChannel it makes sense to call it a trace. If an expression of a collection of these units is described in this doc somewhere we could just call it a sub-trace. Many APMs think of it that way anyway, where there's not really a distinction between spans and traces, they're all just nested elements.

Reviewer 4: Yes, using (internal) terms from APM vendors will not help here.
I thought using Span would be quite good because it's also used in OpenTelemetry which is quite popular meanwhile and open.
At some other places you used `single traceable action`. Matches better but is quite long.

Anyhow, feel free to keep it as it is. APM aware people will be likely able to understand this and others are likely lost at more places.

Author: The `single traceable action` terminology might be better here. It _is_ long, but it's also unambiguous and not so much based on loaded terminology like "span" or whatever else an APM might know the concept as. What do you think of changing it to that?

Reviewer 4: sounds good.

* Returns: {boolean} `true` if all handlers were successfully unsubscribed,
  and `false` otherwise.

Helper to unsubscribe a collection of functions from the corresponding channels.
This is the same as calling [`channel.unsubscribe(onMessage)`][] on each channel
individually.

```mjs
import diagnostics_channel from 'node:diagnostics_channel';

const channels = diagnostics_channel.tracingChannel('my-channel');

channels.unsubscribe({
  start(message) {
    // Handle start message
  },
  end(message) {
    // Handle end message
  },
  asyncStart(message) {
    // Handle asyncEnd message
  },
  asyncEnd(message) {
    // Handle asyncEnd message
  },
  error(message) {
    // Handle error message
  },
});
```

```cjs
const diagnostics_channel = require('node:diagnostics_channel');

const channels = diagnostics_channel.tracingChannel('my-channel');

channels.unsubscribe({
  start(message) {
    // Handle start message
  },
  end(message) {
    // Handle end message
  },
  asyncStart(message) {
    // Handle asyncEnd message
  },
  asyncEnd(message) {
    // Handle asyncEnd message
  },
  error(message) {
    // Handle error message
  },
});
```

> #### `tracingChannel.traceSync(fn[, ctx[, thisArg, [, ...args]]])`

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
#### `tracingChannel.traceSync(fn[, ctx[, thisArg[, ...args]]])`
```

<!-- YAML
added:
 - REPLACEME
-->

> Stability: 1 - Experimental

* `fn` {Function} Function to wrap a trace around

> * `ctx` {Object} Shared context object to correlate trace events through

Reviewer 3: The term "context" here is not present in the above channel sections. I'd find the "context" confusing here as it is a vague term and is used heavily in the AsyncLocalStorage documentation.

If I understand correctly, can we name this parameter as `data` instead?

Author: I'm fine with whatever naming people feel is clearest here.

* `thisArg` {any} The receiver to be used for the function call
* `...args` {any} Optional arguments to pass to the function
* Returns: {any} The return value of the given function

Trace a synchronous function call. This will always produce `start` and `end`
events around the execution and may also produce an `error` event if the given
function throws an error. This will run the given function using
[`channel.runStores(data, ...)`][] on the `start` channel.

```mjs
import diagnostics_channel from 'node:diagnostics_channel';

const channels = diagnostics_channel.tracingChannel('my-channel');

channels.traceSync(() => {
  // Do something
}, {
  context: 'something',
});
```

```cjs
const diagnostics_channel = require('node:diagnostics_channel');

const channels = diagnostics_channel.tracingChannel('my-channel');

channels.traceSync(() => {
  // Do something
}, {
  context: 'something',
});
```

> #### `tracingChannel.tracePromise(fn[, ctx[, thisArg, [, ...args]]])`

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
#### `tracingChannel.tracePromise(fn[, ctx[, thisArg[, ...args]]])`
```

<!-- YAML
added:
 - REPLACEME
-->

> Stability: 1 - Experimental

* `fn` {Function} Promise-returning function to wrap a trace around
* `data` {Object} Shared object to correlate trace events through
* `thisArg` {any} The receiver to be used for the function call
* `...args` {any} Optional arguments to pass to the function

> * Returns: {Promise} Promise returned by the given function

Reviewer 4: It's a chained promise, not the original one

Author: That's an implementation detail which ideally shouldn't be visible to the user. Do you think this is really relevant?

Reviewer 4: For plain, native promises not. But there are still a lot frameworks which use thenables like bluebird. I have even seen thenables which are EventEmitters to allow caller to decide on `await`ing or something else.

But maybe we should just disallow non native promises. Then it's don't care.

Trace a promise-returning function call. This will always produce `start`,
`end`, `asyncStart`, and `asyncEnd` events around the execution and may also
produce an `error` event if the given function throws an error or the returned
promise rejects. This will run the given function using
[`channel.runStores(data, ...)`][] on the `start` channel.

```mjs
import diagnostics_channel from 'node:diagnostics_channel';

const channels = diagnostics_channel.tracingChannel('my-channel');

channels.tracePromise(async () => {
  // Do something
}, {
  context: 'something',
});
```

```cjs
const diagnostics_channel = require('node:diagnostics_channel');

const channels = diagnostics_channel.tracingChannel('my-channel');

channels.tracePromise(async () => {
  // Do something
}, {
  context: 'something',
});
```

> #### `tracingChannel.traceCallback(fn[, position[, ctx[, thisArg, [, ...args]]]])`

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
#### `tracingChannel.traceCallback(fn[, position[, ctx[, thisArg[, ...args]]]])`
```

<!-- YAML
added:
 - REPLACEME
-->

> Stability: 1 - Experimental

> * `fn` {Function} Promise-returning function to wrap a trace around

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* `fn` {Function} callback using function to wrap a trace around
```

* `position` {number} Zero-indexed argument position of expected callback
* `ctx` {Object} Shared context object to correlate trace events through
* `thisArg` {any} The receiver to be used for the function call
* `...args` {any} Optional arguments to pass to the function

> * Returns: {Promise} Promise returned by the given function

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Returns: {any} The return value of the given function
```

> Trace a promise-returning function call. This will always produce `start`,

Reviewer 3: Is the `fn` expected to return a promise? I suppose the `fn` is a void-returning callback instead.

Author: Oh, yep, good catch. Copy/pasted from the `tracePromise` docs and forgot to update that bit. 😅

`end`, `asyncStart`, and `asyncEnd` events around the execution and may also
produce an `error` event if the given function throws an error or the returned
promise rejects. This will run the given function using
[`channel.runStores(data, ...)`][] on the `start` channel.

```mjs
import diagnostics_channel from 'node:diagnostics_channel';

const channels = diagnostics_channel.tracingChannel('my-channel');

channels.traceCallback((arg1, callback) => {
  // Do something
  callback(null, 'result');

> }, {

Reviewer 3: The parameter `position` is missed in the example.

```suggestion
}, 1, {
```

The `start` event represents the synchronous start of a traceable function.
At this point the event data may contain function arguments or anything else
available at the very start of the execution of the function.

#### `end(event)`

* Name: `tracing:${name}:end`

The `end` event represents the synchronous end of a traceable function. At this
point, if the traced function was synchronous the `result` field will be set to
the return value of the function. Alternatively, the `error` field may be
present to represent any thrown errors.

It is recommended to listen specifically to the `error` event to track errors
as it may be possible for a traceable action to produce multiple errors. For
example, an async task which fails may be started internally before the sync
part of the task then throws an error.

#### `asyncStart(event)`

* Name: `tracing:${name}:asyncStart`

The `asyncStart` event represents the callback or continuation of a traceable
function being reached. At this point things like callback arguments may be
available, or anything else expressing the "result" of the action.

For callbacks-based functions, the first argument of the callback will be

> assigned to the `error` field, if not undefined, and the second argument will

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
assigned to the `error` field, if not `undefined` or `null`, and the second argument will
```

const store = new AsyncLocalStorage();

const channel = diagnostics_channel.channel('my-channel');

channel.bindStore(store);
channel.unbindStore(store);
```

```cjs
const diagnostics_channel = require('node:diagnostics_channel');
const { AsyncLocalStorage } = require('node:async_hooks');

const store = new AsyncLocalStorage();

const channel = diagnostics_channel.channel('my-channel');

channel.bindStore(store);
channel.unbindStore(store);
```

#### `channel.runStores(data, fn[, thisArg[, ...args]])`

<!-- YAML
added:
 - REPLACEME
-->

> Stability: 1 - Experimental

* `data` {any} Message to send to subscribers and bind to stores
* `fn` {Function} Handler to run within the entered storage context
* `thisArg` {any} The receiver to be used for the function call.
* `...args` {any} Optional arguments to pass to the function.

Applies the given data to any AsyncLocalStorage instances bound to the channel
for the duration of the given function, then publishes the [`start` event][]
for the channel within the context of the bound stores. If a transform function
was given to [`channel.bindStore(store)`][] it will be applied to transform the

> message data before it becomes to context value for the store. The prior

Reviewer 5: I think you mean this?

```suggestion
message data before it becomes the context value for the store. The prior
```

[`diagnostics_channel.tracingChannel()`][] is used to construct a
`TracingChannel`. As with `Channel` it is recommended to create and reuse a
single `TracingChannel` at the top-level of the file rather than creating them
dynamically.

#### `tracingChannel.subscribe(subscribers)`

<!-- YAML
added:
 - REPLACEME
-->

> Stability: 1 - Experimental

* `subscribers` {Object} Set of [TracingChannel Channels][] subscribers
  * `start` {Function} The [`start` event][] subscriber
  * `end` {Function} The [`end` event][] subscriber
  * `asyncStart` {Function} The [`asyncStart` event][] subscriber
  * `asyncEnd` {Function} The [`asyncEnd` event][] subscriber
  * `error` {Function} The [`error` event][] subscriber

Helper to subscribe a collection of functions to the corresponding channels.
This is the same as calling [`channel.subscribe(onMessage)`][] on each channel
individually.

```mjs
import diagnostics_channel from 'node:diagnostics_channel';

const channels = diagnostics_channel.tracingChannel('my-channel');

channels.subscribe({
  start(message) {
    // Handle start message
  },
  end(message) {
    // Handle end message
  },
  asyncStart(message) {

>     // Handle asyncEnd message

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    // Handle asyncStart message
```

  },
  asyncEnd(message) {
    // Handle asyncEnd message
  },
  error(message) {
    // Handle error message
  },
});
```

```cjs
const diagnostics_channel = require('node:diagnostics_channel');

const channels = diagnostics_channel.tracingChannel('my-channel');

channels.subscribe({
  start(message) {
    // Handle start message
  },
  end(message) {
    // Handle end message
  },
  asyncStart(message) {

>     // Handle asyncEnd message

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    // Handle asyncStart message
```

This is the same as calling [`channel.unsubscribe(onMessage)`][] on each channel
individually.

```mjs
import diagnostics_channel from 'node:diagnostics_channel';

const channels = diagnostics_channel.tracingChannel('my-channel');

channels.unsubscribe({
  start(message) {
    // Handle start message
  },
  end(message) {
    // Handle end message
  },
  asyncStart(message) {
    // Handle asyncEnd message
  },
  asyncEnd(message) {
    // Handle asyncEnd message
  },
  error(message) {
    // Handle error message
  },
});
```

```cjs
const diagnostics_channel = require('node:diagnostics_channel');

const channels = diagnostics_channel.tracingChannel('my-channel');

channels.unsubscribe({
  start(message) {
    // Handle start message
  },
  end(message) {
    // Handle end message
  },
  asyncStart(message) {
    // Handle asyncEnd message
  },
  asyncEnd(message) {
    // Handle asyncEnd message
  },
  error(message) {
    // Handle error message
  },
});
```

#### `tracingChannel.traceSync(fn[, data[, thisArg[, ...args]]])`

<!-- YAML
added:
 - REPLACEME
-->

> Stability: 1 - Experimental

* `fn` {Function} Function to wrap a trace around

> * `data` {Object} Shared object to correlate trace events through

Reviewer 5: A section explaining the utility of shared data objects would be useful.

Also, `import 'node:trace_events'` is a thing, so there's a terminology collision here.

* `...args` {any} Optional arguments to pass to the function
* Returns: {any} The return value of the given function

Trace a callback-receiving function call. This will always produce a
[`start` event][] and [`end` event][] around the synchronous portion of the
function execution, and will produce a [`asyncStart` event][] and
[`asyncEnd` event][] around the callback execution. It may also produce an
[`error` event][] if the given function throws an error or the returned
promise rejects. This will run the given function using
[`channel.runStores(data, ...)`][] on the `start` channel.

```mjs
import diagnostics_channel from 'node:diagnostics_channel';

const channels = diagnostics_channel.tracingChannel('my-channel');

channels.traceCallback((arg1, callback) => {
  // Do something
  callback(null, 'result');
}, 1, {
  some: 'thing',
}, thisArg, arg1, callback);
```

```cjs
const diagnostics_channel = require('node:diagnostics_channel');

const channels = diagnostics_channel.tracingChannel('my-channel');

channels.traceCallback((arg1, callback) => {
  // Do something
  callback(null, 'result');
}, {
  some: 'thing',
}, thisArg, arg1, callback);
```

> ### TracingChannel Channels

Reviewer 5: Somewhere here it needs to be made clear that we're talking about `diagnostics_channel` channels, and not instances of `TracingChannel`.

A TracingChannel is a collection of several channels representing specific

> points in the execution lifecycle of a single traceable action. The behaviour

Reviewer 5: `traceable action` and `traceable function` probably need to be defined somewhere. In some places they also _seem_ like they're used interchangeably.

Author: The `traceable action` terminology is somewhat _intentionally_ vague to avoid calling it a "span" when there's not really any universally accepted name for what people do with it. 😅

the task "completes". In the case of a synchronous task the `result` will be
the return value and the `error` will be anything thrown from the function.
With callback-based async functions the `result` will be the second argument
of the callback while the `error` will either be a thrown error visible in the
`end` event or the first callback argument in either of the `asyncStart` or
`asyncEnd` events.

Tracing channels should follow a naming pattern of:

* `tracing:module.class.method:start` or `tracing:module.function:start`
* `tracing:module.class.method:end` or `tracing:module.function:end`
* `tracing:module.class.method:asyncStart` or `tracing:module.function:asyncStart`
* `tracing:module.class.method:asyncEnd` or `tracing:module.function:asyncEnd`
* `tracing:module.class.method:error` or `tracing:module.function:error`

#### `start(event)`

* Name: `tracing:${name}:start`

The `start` event represents the synchronous start of a traceable function.
At this point the event data may contain function arguments or anything else
available at the very start of the execution of the function.

#### `end(event)`

* Name: `tracing:${name}:end`

> The `end` event represents the synchronous end of a traceable function. At this

Reviewer 5: Synchronous start and synchronous end could be worded more clearly to indicate that they're when a function is called and when it returns (clarifying that return does _not_ mean when `return` appears in an async function).

example, an async task which fails may be started internally before the sync
part of the task then throws an error.

#### `asyncStart(event)`

* Name: `tracing:${name}:asyncStart`

The `asyncStart` event represents the callback or continuation of a traceable
function being reached. At this point things like callback arguments may be
available, or anything else expressing the "result" of the action.

For callbacks-based functions, the first argument of the callback will be
assigned to the `error` field, if not `undefined` or `null`, and the second
argument will be assigned to the `result` field.

For promises, the argument to the `resolve` path will be assigned to `result`
or the argument to the `reject` path will be assign to `error`.

It is recommended to listen specifically to the `error` event to track errors
as it may be possible for a traceable action to produce multiple errors. For
example, an async task which fails may be started internally before the sync
part of the task then throws an error.

#### `asyncEnd(event)`

* Name: `tracing:${name}:asyncEnd`

The `asyncEnd` event represents the callback of an asynchronous traceable

> function being completed. It's not likely event data will change after the

Reviewer 5: Is it before or after the callback returns? Let's make that clear. "Completed" can be kind of ambiguous.

> `asyncStart` event, however it may be useful for some tracers to see the point

Reviewer 5: The term `tracer` probably also needs definition, or replacement with something clearer.

channel.unsubscribe(onMessage);
```

#### `channel.bindStore(store[, transform])`

<!-- YAML
added:
 - REPLACEME
-->

> Stability: 1 - Experimental

* `store` {AsyncLocalStorage} The store to which to bind the event data
* `transform` {Function} Transform event data before setting the store context

When [`channel.runStores(data, ...)`][] is called, the given event data will
be applied to any store bound to the channel. If the store has already been
bound the previous `transform` function will be replaced with the new one.
The `transform` function may be omitted to have the event data be used as the
context directly.

```mjs
import diagnostics_channel from 'node:diagnostics_channel';
import { AsyncLocalStorage } from 'node:async_hooks';

const store = new AsyncLocalStorage();

const channel = diagnostics_channel.channel('my-channel');

channel.bindStore(store, (data) => {

>   return { data };

Reviewer 4: Isn't a transform function like this - which returns a new object - problematic in the e.g. the `traceCallback` api? One might expect to get the same `context` object in all events within`traceCallback`.
If I follow the code correct a fresh object will be created each time.

Or is this intended and user has to take care to do the right thing.

Author: It's only used for the store replacement, not for the event, and the store replacement will only happen if you've explicitly done a bindStore to that specific event with your store. So if you _want_ to have a new context object in the callback you could, but it won't happen unless you tell it to do that. The intent is more that you would store your span object on the trace context object in the transform for the start and then optionally you could restore that as the context by retrieving it in the transform for the callback.

My feeling on it is that it's maybe a moderately helpful escape hatch in the event the context does not propagate the way you think it should, but it's basically just a way to recover a broken propagation that should probably be fixed _elsewhere_.

Author: Also, an example of the context restoration use case, for clarity:

```js
startChannel.bindStore(spanStore, (ctx) => {
  const parentSpan = spanStore.getStore()
  const span = new Span(ctx, parentSpan)
  ctx.span = span
  return span
})

asyncStartChannel.bindStore(spanStore, (ctx) => {
  // Context could have broken before asyncStart was reached,
  // but we stored the span on ctx so we can restore from that.
  return ctx.span
})
```

Reviewer 4: ok thanks. got it (once again :o)).
seems there are too many contexts around for me to stay on track...

This is the same as calling [`channel.unsubscribe(onMessage)`][] on each channel
individually.

```mjs
import diagnostics_channel from 'node:diagnostics_channel';

const channels = diagnostics_channel.tracingChannel('my-channel');

channels.unsubscribe({
  start(message) {
    // Handle start message
  },
  end(message) {
    // Handle end message
  },
  asyncStart(message) {
    // Handle asyncStart message
  },
  asyncEnd(message) {
    // Handle asyncEnd message
  },
  error(message) {
    // Handle error message
  },
});
```

```cjs
const diagnostics_channel = require('node:diagnostics_channel');

const channels = diagnostics_channel.tracingChannel('my-channel');

channels.unsubscribe({
  start(message) {
    // Handle start message
  },
  end(message) {
    // Handle end message
  },
  asyncStart(message) {
    // Handle asyncStart message
  },
  asyncEnd(message) {
    // Handle asyncEnd message
  },
  error(message) {
    // Handle error message
  },
});
```

#### `tracingChannel.traceSync(fn[, data[, thisArg[, ...args]]])`

<!-- YAML
added:
 - REPLACEME
-->

> Stability: 1 - Experimental

* `fn` {Function} Function to wrap a trace around

> * `data` {Object} Shared object to correlate events through

Reviewer 4: using `data` here but `context` in code is a bit confusing. Not blocking but I would prefer to have this aligned.
